[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> So Tracy, you know, the war in Iran is
primarily, at least from a commodity
standpoint, being understood as like an
oil shock. That's the number that most
people are paying attention to.
>> headline, sure.
>> But as we know from multiple episodes
we've already done, it's not just an oil
region. And of course, we've been
talking about fertilizer in one of our
episodes. We did the episode on other
sort of dry bulk commodity shipping
that's affected by the closure or the
almost closure of the Strait of Hormuz.
There's plenty there. It's not just an
oil story.
>> Yeah, the one silver lining of all of
this, I guess, is that we're all
becoming commodities ex- supply chain
commodities experts and petrochemicals
as well. I should just say we're
recording this on March 17th cuz who
knows what's going to happen by the time
this episode comes out. But one of the
big headlines today is that Iran has
just struck one of the big gas fields in
the UAE,
>> Yes.
>> which is the Shah field in the sort of
empty quarter area. And it's on fire. So
pretty dramatic footage, which
definitely does tend to concentrate your
mind on one particular commodity, which
is gas.
>> Well, there's sort of like two
dimensions of the supply chain
disruption, isn't there? Because there
is the fact that for the most part,
there are very few vessels going through
the Strait of Hormuz, and people are
sort of wondering, "When will when will
that open again?" right? But then,
there's the other question of, as you
just mentioned, there's a lot of damage
to core infrastructure of various sorts.
And so setting aside when the Strait
opens, how badly will the production
infrastructure be impaired and how long
will that go on? That's a sort of
separate dimension besides just the
passing of the ships.
>> Right. And I think net gas in particular
have these sort of geopolitical
connotations even before the war with
Iran. We're all used to thinking about,
you know, big strategic pipelines and
thinking about potential disruptions to
those. Back when Russia invaded Ukraine,
there was obviously a European gas
crisis and so everyone's kind of worried
about Europe once again.
>> Yes.
>> There's a lot to discuss.
>> Totally. I saw a headline today also on
the train here talking about how like
Pakistan is very serious like they have
like a month of net gas right now and
they're heavily dependent on gas from
the region. Of course, the fertilizer
story as we learned urea downstream from
net gas etc. Anyway, last year we did
our live episode with one of our
favorite commodities guest Bob Brackett
and I recall
as we were walking out of the theater, I
was like Bob, we got to have you back on
just for like an episode. Let's pick a
commodity. And he said, let's talk about
net next time I'm on, let's talk about
net gas. I was like, all right. And
[laughter] so
>> And so it turns out that now is the
perfect time for the perfect guest.
>> perfect time for the perfect guest. We
are going to be speaking with Bob
Brackett, managing director and senior
research analyst covering North American
oil and gas exploration and production
and global metals and mining at
Bernstein Research. So, Bob, thank you
so much for coming back on Odd Lots.
>> Thanks for having me, Joe. Thanks for
having me, Tracy. When I said we should
do an episode on one commodity at that
time, why did your mind immediately go
to net gas? Was that the big Was that
the big story in your mind?
>> The one and I've I've told clients this,
I am most useful when I am least loved.
>> [laughter]
>> And the problem with being a cyclical
commodity analyst is everyone will ask
me about whatever is the highest on the
screen. That's the thing that's going to
mean revert lower. The money has already
been made there and therefore you should
to looking at the things that no one's
really talking about. And so I would
argue, you know, today, Henry Hub, US
natural gas, not the LNG stuff that's
shut in, not other commodities, Henry
Hub is unloved,
>> Okay.
>> sitting at $3 an MCF, while we have all
of these underlying demand drivers in
the US. So it's the forgotten molecule
today.
>> The forgotten molecule. I like that.
>> But just broadly though, you were pretty
spot on when it came to nat gas, cuz I
remember last year you turned bullish
after like 15 years of being bearish,
something like that. So I know you're
too modest to say that you got that call
correct, but directionally things seem
to be going your way.
>> Yeah, so I've been at Bernstein covering
the energy space, yeah, nigh on 15, 16
years. And for most of that time we've
had these giant disruptions. First we
had shale gas, where the entire oil and
gas complex was drilling and learning
curves of how do you frack gas, how do
you get it out. We drove the cost of
shale gas down up 350 an MCF. And then
shale oil comes along the way and just
hands out, you know, gives away the
associated gas from oil directed
drilling. And so you've had a big chunk
of the cost curve that doesn't really
care what the price of gas is. It's a
byproduct. Wa-ha, gas prices go negative
at time to time, it doesn't slow down
the oil drilling. And then finally
you're starting to see the light where
in the same way that the shale oil
industry became well behaved kind of in
2018, the shale gas industry, and
especially the Haynesville Shale sitting
down there on the border of Louisiana
and Texas, starts to behave itself. And
in a world where you have these really
strong structural demand drivers to the
upside, and you have discipline on the
supply side, that's a nice time to come
into a sector.
>> Amazing. Perfect setup.
One more sort of setup question. I was
sort of thinking about this on the way
in. Like when I think about oil,
you You there's various grades of oil,
and there's various prices, but
basically there's one global price of
oil, and everything trades at a little
bit of a spread to that, depending a
little bit on geography, and depending a
little bit on grade, and light sweet,
and heavy sour, whatever it is. My
impression, and tell me if I'm wrong, is
that with gas, the story is like,
there's one type of gas, but there is
absolutely not one global market,
because the exact flip side of oil, the
supply chain is just so radically
>> fractured.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah, if you think about it, a VLCC,
very large crude carrier, holds 2
million barrels of oil.
And oil today is 100 bucks a barrel, I
couldn't have said that 3-4 weeks ago,
and the movement, the cost of moving
that halfway across the world is a few
bucks a barrel. So, for a couple
percent, I can take my product, deliver
it to you wherever you want.
>> Anywhere.
>> You go to LNG, the cost of getting shale
gas out of the Marcellus from 2 miles
down and 2 miles out through the
fractures is less than a dollar.
Then it's a couple bucks to get it to
market, Henry Hub, through pipelines. If
I want to ship it, cost me 2 and 1/2
bucks to liquefy it, another buck and a
half to put it on a vessel, send it
somewhere, and then re-gas it. And so,
80-90% of the cost of gas is in the
movement.
>> Wow.
>> And so, in that world, all right, you've
got a law of one price for oil, right?
Because the relative value of the cargo
versus the shipping is trivial. With
gas, it's all a game of distance and
markets, and therefore, there is no one
price.
>> Hm. So, can you maybe just situate us on
Iran's place in the sort of, I guess,
gas complex of the world? Because, you
know, we think about it as a commodities
player, but a sort of unreliable
commodities player in some respects. You
never know what's going to get
sanctioned, and nat gas, as we all know,
tends to be kind of volatile in and of
itself. So, what exactly is Iran's role
in this particular complex?
>> So, we're looking at the largest gas
field on the planet and the Qataris call
it North Field and that extends into
Iranian territory where it's kind of
Pars, but you've got something that the
numbers get huge, but you're we think
about a TCF of gas is a huge amount of
gas.
>> What's TCF again?
>> So, think of a LNG vessel
>> Yeah.
>> can hold somewhere the big ones, the
Q-Maxes coming out of Qatar could be 6
BCF, billion cubic feet.
>> Oh, cubic feet.
>> one would be 4 BCF.
>> Got it.
>> And so, a TCF would be 250 vessels.
>> BCF would be a really good boy band
name?
>> Yeah, 4 [laughter] 4 BCF.
>> Yeah. Sorry, go ahead. I interrupted.
>> I wouldn't have gone there, but yes,
very 4 BCF.
>> My daughter might be into that, yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Right, a good a good Haynesville well, a
good Marcellus well might produce over
its life 20 BCF.
>> Okay.
>> It could load four four or five cargoes
of LNG.
So, take that times a thousand and
that's the scale of the field of North
Field.
>> Wow.
>> And it's a gas field, it also produces a
lot of condensate associated and so,
it's a massive money maker.
It sits west of the Strait of Hormuz.
>> Right.
>> And so, all of the LNG coming out of the
Gulf except Oman is sort of trapped west
of the Strait of Hormuz.
>> Wait, just to be clear, that field is
Qatar and Iran, it goes into both?
>> It's it's giant structure, largest gas
structure on the planet and it's shared,
geologically it's shared. Operationally
it's absolutely not shared, but yes,
it's
>> Operationally it's all
>> Operationally the North Field, what the
Qataris have called North Field, comes
back to Qatar, gets liquefied there,
loaded, ships east out through the
Strait of Hormuz, typically goes to
Asia.
>> This is what I was going to ask. So,
again, because it's so fractured, where
is it all Asia? Like where's that gas
going and who's it competing with or
what's that market?
>> So, the global LNG market about 500
million tons per annum all and the the
units that will kill you. We're going to
be converting between these have a
million and the minute it gets on a
vessel it becomes a ton for whatever
reason.
And so out of that, you know, Qatar the
three powerhouses of LNG are Qatar, the
US, and Australia.
>> Oh.
>> The Qataris have the lowest cost fields.
The condensate pays for the fields. They
could get they're never going to they
could give away the gas and they sign
these really long-term contracts, you
know, around the world but a lot into
Asia. The US is the other powerhouse. It
doesn't sign long-term contracts. So if
you went back in time
and let's say you're a Japanese utility
and you're sitting on an island and you
need something to burn to spin a turbine
and generate electricity. You're sort of
indifferent. I got to bring a vessel in.
I could bring a cargo of crude, I could
bring some fuel oil, some diesel, or gas
and so I'm sort of indifferent. I'll pay
roughly the same price for all of those
and so for half a century we've always
had oil linked contracts for LNG. So
when we think about JKM, they're often
linked to a crude cocktail price in
Japan.
The US comes along and breaks that and
says, "You know what? Just pay me TTF.
I'll take Henry Hub. I'll buy Henry Hub
off of this flooded market in the US.
Liquefy it on the Gulf Coast mostly.
I'll send it to where you want and a
bunch of merchants will capture that
arb. And so it's a completely different
pricing. It's much more of a spot market
than these big heavily contracted Qatari
volumes. And so now, you know, Asia's
running around saying,
"I got force majeure out of Qatar. I
don't have this. I got to go burn
something else and maybe I'll burn
somebody else's LNG but if not, I'll
burn coal. I'll burn fuel oil, diesel. I
I need electrons."
>> So speaking of arbing the price, so with
so many different pricing benchmarks and
now this dislocation, are you seeing any
weird like
price movements that people are like
starting to look at and take advantage
of?
>> We're still well under what happened
when Russia invaded Ukraine.
>> Huh.
>> So, certainly Europe prices, and we
could call them another alphabet soup,
TTF or NBP, but TTF, so a price into the
Netherlands, has not gotten to nearly
the levels it did during Russia-Ukraine.
>> Some of that is it always felt, I
remember in in the end of 2021, people
were wondering why Europe gas prices
were so high and they're like, "Oh,
those Russians are terrible. They don't
know how to maintain production." In
fact, they were just sort of slowly
dialing down the gas in order to tighten
the market, and then you invade in
winter, February, peak demand.
>> Right.
>> You know, now we're entering the
shoulder season. In the spring and in
the fall, it's beautiful outside in the
northern hemisphere and people don't
need that same amount of gas. And so,
shoulder season's normally a terrible
price for gas, so that sort of helps.
And what also helps is, you know, to a
certain degree, Europe has weaned itself
off Russian gas and it feels like it has
more options. We'll see how the things
turn when we get toward the summer.
>> Let's talk about, you know, one of the
stories in the US has been the rise of
LNG exports. Obviously, the export
terminals. Like, how much has that
scaled up? You know, today in 2026, how
much more are we exporting versus what
we were in say 2016 or 2021 prior to the
invasion of Ukraine? And what is the how
much capacity is going to come online in
the coming years?
>> Yeah, so if we wound back the clock,
there's an interesting historic anecdote
that's coming soon. So, right now Qatar
is not selling LNG.
However, there is an LNG terminal called
Golden Pass. It's 30% XOM, 70% Qatar. It
sits in Texas.
It's loading now. And so in March it
might be that the next cargo that Qatar
sells is a Texas cargo, not a Qatari
cargo. And that's because this Golden
Pass terminal was an import terminal.
Right? So if you go back far enough,
before shale gas, the strategy in the US
was the US is going to run out of gas.
It's going to get priced off of the
price of diesel, right? I'm going to run
out of gas, I'm going to have to need
electricity, I'm going to go burn
diesel. And so everyone had their
favorite strategy. I'm going to build an
import terminal and I'll bring in Qatari
gas or choose your favorite gas and
that'll save my energy bill.
And then shale gas completely destroyed
that strategy, but along the way
ExxonMobil and Qatar had this import
terminal and they just flipped the
switch and said, "Well, instead of being
a regas terminal, let's make it an LNG
terminal." And so that is loading as we
speak. It'll start to sell cargoes as
early as this month. And right now
that's Qatari gas's only source of
revenue until things get fixed in the
Middle East.
>> So speaking of shale, one of the
legacies of the shale boom is that a lot
of energy companies got very nervous
about overexpansion and ramping up
supply. In a situation like this, what's
your gut check on how fast LNG producers
can really ramp things up both
logistically and then just in terms of
their sheer willingness and I I guess in
the face of their shareholders.
>> So the gestation period of a shale gas
well, if you're super quick, might be
two three quarters realistically. The
gestational period, and of course these
aren't gestational periods, of an LNG
facility is four years.
>> Wow.
>> So if we anniversary what happened four
years ago, Russia invades Ukraine. What
was the theme that started this year?
Oh, there's going to be an LNG glut in
2026 and 2027. And and many an incorrect
analyst hand raised, you know, has
written about the approaching LNG glut.
Right? This event has changed that
logic. And so the reason there was a
glut this year is because 4 years ago
everyone ran out and said, "I need LNG.
I need the cavalry. Quick, call the
cavalry. How long's it going to take?"
Right? 4 years. And so the answer is LNG
facilities once built run full. Right?
There's an ability to debottleneck and
run above nameplate, but basically there
is no spare capacity.
To a certain degree we had OPEC with a
bit of spare capacity that they released
in the first second week of the war.
There is no equivalent on LNG. Every
cargo would have gotten delivered
anyway.
So there's no flex in the system and the
system [music] takes 4 years to fix.
>> [music]
>> So one of the stories that after
Russia's invasion of Ukraine was that
well, this is going to be a boon to US
gas and we're going to ship them Are we
shipping a lot more LNG to Europe than
we were?
>> Yeah. And so we go back to this phase
where Golden Pass was an import
terminal. And then we got to about And
so think of US overall gas supply demand
is about 120 BCF a day. Couple years ago
10% of that would have been LNG exports.
>> Okay.
>> Today we just we're getting close to 20
It'll be 20%. And so over the next, you
know, out to 2030 we'll just be adding
multiple BCF a day. And so it is the
fastest growing part of US gas demand.
>> One of the controversies with export
terminals as you mentioned not that long
ago, we were absolutely swimming in free
gas. And there was this concern that
well, if you start exporting it, it
raises the domestic price cuz then you
don't have these gluts anymore. Has the
rise of LNG exports meaningfully raised
the price of domestic gas consumption?
>> I wish.
>> [laughter]
>> As the E&P investor, that's the dream of
all E&P investors. You know, we're
sitting here, you know, entering the
shoulder season and Henry Hub's $3. It
got to five, it got to six during the
winter where the seasonal demand was the
highest. There is no strong evidence
that that extra 10 going to 20% of the
demand wedge has changed price, right?
What changes price is where supply
equals demand. And up until now, the
supply side's been perfectly willing to
hand the market as much gas as the world
wants, as much the US wants at 350.
I think we think that's changed. I think
that's changed. I think, you know,
ultimately, certainly on shale oil,
we're approaching a world where oil
your shale oil inventory 5 to 10 years
from now looks pretty lean. You're
starting to see oil and gas companies
say, well, what do we do in a post-shale
world? Shale oil world? You know, what
can we do? We can go international,
right? So, you've got you can go to the
Middle East and certainly there people
there looking for shale oil and or
conventional oil like the the Shah gas
field today. People are looking at M&A.
I'll just acquire my partners. Some
people are looking at gas, but yeah,
there is this sense that it is a it's
always been a finite resource.
It had been a growing resource and one
where this learning curve had taken cost
out every year. You know, that chapter
has kind of passed and now it's a world
if you're in a planning cycle of 5 to 10
years and you look out 5 to 10 years,
you got to go replace that stuff.
>> Mhm.
How elastic is demand for something like
nat gas? Cuz I'm used to thinking about
it as someone with a house in the
Northeast as something that I have to
buy every year unless I actually get
really good at chopping firewood or
something like that. But I imagine there
must be some marginal source of demand
that actually depends on the price.
>> So, there's the demand for that which
gas gives you, which is electricity. And
so, there's substitution. So, one thing
to watch is bubbling behind the scenes,
global thermal coal prices are starting
to take off. They're up 30% year to
date.
What happened when Russia invaded
Ukraine,
Europe bought every LNG cargo they
could, sucked it all the way into
Europe. Asia was left saying, "Well,
we're short electricity. Let's go burn
some more coal. Let's consume more." And
so, thermal coal prices back in
Russia-Ukraine, 300 bucks a ton.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah, started the year at 100 bucks a
ton, we're up to 130. And so, there's
always going to be there's some demand
destruction, but you know, people really
like electricity and air conditioning
[laughter] and the things that it gives.
And so, the answer is you'll start to
look for Certainly, coal is an obvious
place. And then, eventually some demand
destruction, but that's at kind of much
higher levels.
>> Mhm.
>> Do you have a read on Tracy has
mentioned in the beginning, setting
aside the Strait of Hormuz, just pure
infrastructure destruction. Do you have
a read on like how much sort of Qatari
production is going to be impaired in
the medium to long term here?
>> So, we know LNG terminals have a bit of
momentum associated with them. And we've
got pretty good experience in the Gulf
Coast where hurricanes come through, you
bring down your LNG facility, and you
bring it back up. Same with, you know,
oil platforms in the Gulf of America,
Gulf of Mexico. Hurricane comes through,
you shut in, you come back. And so, in
general, oil and gas assets are built
They're built for turnarounds, right?
They're built to go down and come back
up, especially when you can plan ahead.
So, you'll get whipsaws on the order of
weeks.
And so, if this is over in weeks, right,
we'll kind of have a
big wedge of a month of chaos that'll
filter through the economy.
>> Mhm.
>> And if it goes on for months and months,
it's something like if we talk about the
big three LNG, the US, Qatar, and
Australia, they're kind of each a fifth,
a fifth, a fifth of global supply. So,
something like 20% of the LNG would be
knocked out.
>> Mhm.
>> And
that's needs a lot of coal to replace or
a lot of demand destruction.
>> So, just on this point, I think
commodity markets in particular are very
used to fading Middle East flare-ups
very quickly. Is there any reason to
believe that this time is going to be
different? You you have, you know,
decades of experience in this space.
Does it feel different to you?
>> As a geologist and not a geopolitician,
right? I'm not sure I'm the perfect
guest for that answer.
>> What the market is saying is that we're
returning to normal.
Right? And so and yeah, so the is the
market right or wrong? I have a few
signposts. And so,
one of the one I'll use oil as an
example.
>> Mhm.
>> [clears throat]
>> When you take the price of oil and you
add in the crack spread, right? Which is
effectively what does the consumer pay
for diesel, for gasoline, etc.
When the cost of that gets to 7% of
global GDP,
right? The world says that's too much
and you stop using it and that's where
we got in 2022. Right? Today that'd be
about a $120 crude, call it about a $60
crack spread. So, on my screen, I can
show you oil never works a year forward
when the cost of oil is 6% of GDP.
>> Mhm.
>> And so, that's kind of that
>> Wait, where are we right now?
>> So, today we're 100 plus 40. So, crack
spreads around 40 and these things are
moving by the minute, but yeah, call it
about 140. So, we're not quite there.
But there would be an exit alarm ringing
if we did get to kind of 180 crude plus
crack spreads. And then you'd say, "I
don't need to be a geopolitician. I just
know every time this has happened the
global economy has gone blah.
>> It's probably geopolitics is a fake
field, isn't it?
>> No, I don't I don't know about that. I
But geology feels sorry. If I think
geology is more of a science than
geopolitics, right?
>> Well,
>> Anyone can fake being a geopolitical
expert.
>> Geology doesn't change when you talk
about it, but geopolitics changes when
you talk about it. So, the experimenter
influences the experiment.
>> You know, here's something I've wondered
about, you know, again,
that gas that there's not a global
market. But, with the rise of LNG,
have global markets become somewhat more
correlated over time? Are we trending
towards a global price of gas?
>> Yes. And in fact, if you think of the
role that Saudi Aramco plays when
they're setting their official selling
prices, they will look east and they'll
look west and they'll see what are
Atlantic Basin prices for oil and what
are Pacific Basin and they're not going
to let anybody arb them away, right? So,
kind of they help set a law of one
price.
The Qataris that not only are sort of a
fifth of LNG today, but growing,
right, serve two markets. They can look
east and they can look west. And so, the
idea would be we used to have JKM and
have LNG market over here and you'd have
TTF over here. The Qataris' role in the
market is to say no one's going to arb
me. We're smarter. We've got
more customers than anybody. And they
were going to kind of link the price of
LNG in Europe to the one in Asia. So, we
have kind of the law of one seaborn
price of gas.
And then you can compete against that.
Then I can say, "Okay, if I build an
import terminal here and the shipping is
this much and the liquefaction and regas
is this much, I can do this project,
right?"
>> What's actually going on with Russian
LNG in Europe? Because you hear these
very different stories. One is they're
phasing out Russian imports and then the
other story is, well, Russian imports
are at a record high.
>> If
Russian crude is getting a free pass on
this conflict, then Russian LNG will
likely get a free pass. And so, yeah,
the answer is the longer this conflict
takes. Right? If you are a buyer, and
who are the big buyers of LNG? Right?
You Think about Europe, and they're
buying it for electricity. Think about
Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and China. And one
of the strategies is diversity of supply
is security of supply. Right? That's
kind of been a mantra when you look at
the various utilities. And that's been
proven absolutely correct. If anyone
said, "Well, the Qataris are giving me
the best deal. I'm going to be 100%
linked to them." That was a terrible, in
hindsight, choice.
And so, it diversity of supply means
Russia has
boatloads Yeah, of gas. They've got
pipe-loads of gas now. They've got a
customer that they're not friendly with
anymore. And so, their ability
to build LNG, and eventually, right? The
problem with a pipeline uh is it goes
from point A to point B.
And so, it is a a marriage between the
person putting stuff in one end of the
pipe and the person taking stuff out of
the other end. You can't move that pipe.
The beauty of LNG is you don't have to
get married. You can kind of have lots
of customers with benefits.
>> You mentioned that um and I remember
these stories after Ukraine, after the
invasion of Ukraine, and Europe going
around and trying to buy every LNG
tanker that it could on the market, and
that there were poorer countries that
essentially just got shut out. What was
the next chapter there? What happened?
What did they do?
>> Yeah, and so, the challenge is there's
probably There are two tons of demand
for every LNG cargo. Right? So, there
are twice as many tons of re-gas
as there are liquefaction. And the way
to think about that is a liquefaction
terminal costs $1,000 a ton. And the
ones in the Gulf Coast are big, 10
million tons. So, you're spending 10
billion dollars for this terminal. Regas
terminals are a tenth of that cost.
So, you invest in liquefaction as
>> Liquefaction is the way out.
>> Yep, exactly.
>> is the way in. Okay, just okay.
>> the supplier does the liquefaction, the
buyer does the regas. So, you can build
regas terminals as an option, right? So,
you and therefore, there are twice as
many options. And so, when the market is
tight, you can have two people fighting
for every cargo, which brings us back to
the person that pays the most gets it.
And then, the answer is you need another
form of source of electricity, and it's
developing economies are generally going
to have access to coal, right? They'll
have
coal and power plants, and that's going
to be their choice. It's right. So,
yeah, the second place in fighting for
an LNG cargo is to go buy coal.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I'm going to change the subject slightly
in the grand tradition of us
interviewing Bob. I'm just going to
throw out a random commodity. So, anyone
who came to our live show last year will
know we had a segment with Bob where we
just had the audience basically throw
out random things and
ask him to talk knowledgeably on each of
them for 5 minutes. So, I'm going to do
the same right now with sulfur and
sulfuric acid. And the reason I ask is
because, you know, I was in Abu Dhabi
for a while, and I remember ADNOC, the
big energy giant over there, striking
some off-take deals for its sulfur. And
I was very used to thinking of sulfur as
a byproduct of crude oil, like this
thing that is kind of useless. But, to
my surprise, it turns out it is in fact
very useful because you can make
sulfuric acid out of it, and sulfuric
acid is needed for things like etching
of microchips. So, I'm very curious
what's happening to sulfur right now.
>> Yeah, so the craziest thing happening to
sulfur right now is this Shah gas field
in UAE is on fire.
That gas field, 25% of the gas is H2S.
Right, this is a they call it a sour gas
field. In the old days, if you ever went
out to a well site that was H2S, right,
Joe would have to shave.
>> Yeah.
>> Cuz the equipment to cover you you need
protective gear.
>> have to shave too, right?
>> I'd have to shave too.
>> This is the whole oil will kill you
thing, right?
>> It would take you longer to shave than
me. And so, you could always see the
folks coming back from a sour gas field
cuz they'd gone clean shaven. And so,
here we have one of the largest sources
of H2S and also it's about 10% CO2.
Hopefully, it's controlled, but that's a
an environmental huge safety risk,
right? So, that's that's worrying.
Now, sulfur in general is is not scarce
at all. We got sulfur all over the
place. This field produces sulfur. You
can see if you ever go to Western
Kazakhstan, the big Tengiz Chevrol
field, right, big piles of sulfur.
Also, every copper smelter in the world
generates sulfur cuz you'll take a
mineral, you'll take something like a
chalcopyrite, kind of the the copper
version of fool's gold, and it's a
copper sulfide. And so, if you ever
visited a smelter, you got this big
tower where you're In the old days, you
just burn off the sulfur dioxide, you
make the tower tall enough so that that
acid rain spreads across a large area.
Or you can capture the sulfur. So,
around the world today, copper smelters
lose money. Right, you don't make money
running a copper smelter. They call them
treatment charges, refining charges.
They're kind of zero and they're
sometimes negative. So, a copper smelter
will ring me up as a copper miner and
say, "I want your copper concentrate."
You can take that copper concentrate and
normally you'll get the precious metals
out of it. So, I'll squeeze all the gold
out of your copper ore and I'll make
some money. Or I'll get an efficiency
uplift. I'll pay for 95% conversion and
I'll squeeze some out. The other product
I get is sulfuric acid. So, right now
copper smelters are looking and saying,
"Hey, we're getting a revenue stream off
of sulfuric acid."
Most sulfur's going to go into
agriculture. So, if you have
ammonium sulfate, for example, is an
explosive but it's also a great
fertilizer.
And so, for example, if you in
Kazakhstan, the leading producer of
uranium uses sulfuric acid in the
operations. They compete with
agriculture. And so, when the market is
tight sulfuric acid, you might say,
"Hey, I got to let the people making
food win." So, you can have areas where
you're short sulfuric acid. We're taking
sulfur off of the market.
It's pretty abundant and there there
will be sources and there are lots and
lots of copper smelters that can help
convert it. So, we'll find a way. So,
it's not clear to me that we've run out
of sulfur. I think it's the fifth most
abundant element in the crust.
>> I love asking Bob just like random
things.
>> let's just do this.
I know you basically know all commodity,
but you're not a soft guy, right? Didn't
you like have a bad experience? So, it's
like you're not a
>> Things that were once lit Yeah, if it
comes from the earth, I'm more
comfortable than if it was
>> Right, then things that are grown from
the earth. Got it. When we think about
particularly the war right now and we
we've obviously oil and gas and sulfur,
are there any What else should we be
watching? Any other weird I think I saw
there was a good headline in Bloomberg
about zinc prices have surged, but
anything else going up into the right
these days?
>> Yeah, so if you think about aluminum's
one. So, if you went back to when Russia
invaded Ukraine, everyone went and said,
"Okay, what portion of which element
does Russia produce?" And at the time, a
lot of nickel out of Russia, a lot of
PGMs, platinum group metals, and
palladium
and so people were like, oh, we're going
to run out of those things. You know,
this time around, the Middle East from a
mining perspective doesn't mine a lot
west of the Straits of Hormuz, but they
process a lot. So, smelters are
basically an aluminum People talk about
aluminum as solid electricity. Most of
the cost to make aluminum is the
electricity to make it
in the smelter.
>> And so therefore, you put aluminum
smelters where you have cheap energy.
And so we have some of the certainly in
Bahrain, we've got these very large
aluminum smelters running off cheap
local feedstock natural gas.
And you've seen aluminum price take off
as a result. Zinc smelters are similar,
not quite as energy intensive, and so to
the extent that
the Middle East was both a local and a
global source of cheap energy, and so
those that invested locally are seeing
some of those consequences.
>> All those zinc bar tops in danger. Why
did that become a thing?
>> Wait, is a zinc bar top
>> Yeah.
Is this not a thing in America? In
London, it used to be like if a bar had
a zinc bar top, it was like a thing.
>> Oh, it was like a nice, classy bar.
>> Yeah, it was Yeah, and I never I never
really understood why people were really
into zinc bar tops, but maybe we can,
you know, start ripping them out and
converting them.
>> Yeah, they probably will, yeah.
>> You know, whether we're talking about
domestic American gas or whether we're
talking about oil, etc. I'm curious like
over the last year since Liberation Day,
one of the stories Tracy and I were up
in Alaska. We were at a uh little
manufacturer of a oil country tubular
goods, and they were talking about, you
know, the fluctuating price of steel and
how this was creating all kinds of
issues. What has been the effect in
terms of domestic energy infrastructure
from the tariffs and just the sheer cost
of, you know, building out the
infrastructure?
>> For the most part, energy has been
somewhat exempt from the tariffs. So,
the metal So, what did we have? We had
aluminum tariffs in the US if and we had
steel tariffs. We've had this threat of
copper tariffs that I think is
distorting copper price. The oil patch,
the gas patch, the energy patch mostly
been left alone.
>> Okay.
>> So, that flow through of things like the
domestic content of steel, right? That's
shown up. But, yeah, to first order, if
you think about how the oil industry set
their budgets this year, it wasn't based
on tariffs. It was based on what was the
price of oil on when we started the
year.
>> Actually, related to this, one of the
things we heard from the Trump
administration coming in was that they
were going to be very energy friendly,
you know, friendly to all the molecules,
whether it's coal or gas or whatever.
Have we actually seen policies that have
helped those industries? Do people feel
good about it right now?
>> I I would argue you bombing Iran is a
pro oil price policy. So,
it took a year and a half. Uh but
>> domestic policies, I guess.
>> There's this tension between, you know,
the fact that, you know, one of Trump's
mantra seems to be low oil price, low
gasoline price. He's extremely sensitive
to that. And at the same time, he's sort
of pro the oil industry. That's a a very
narrow path to tread, right? The oil
industry makes money when oil prices are
reasonable.
Now, now I would argue that a good
mid-cycle price of oil $75, $80, right?
And that's where marginal producers can
earn a return. We haven't really had
that, right? And undisturbed, we haven't
had that since Trump took office or much
before. We've been bouncing, you know,
below 75. We've had a glut. The shale
industry has been remarkably resilient,
right? Amidst $60 oil, we haven't seen
shale oil give up very much. And OPEC
has been adding barrels to the market
amidst kind of tepid demand. So, we've
kind of been under mid-cycle prices for
oil through most of the Trump
administration and you know
Biden post the solution in
Russia-Ukraine.
So yeah, there is no policy. So the
question is how do you get somebody to
drill more in Texas and you know, first
and foremost it's the returns.
Right. So clarity of policy permitting
has improved. You'll hear folks in the
oil patch say, right, some of the the
time you would spend to get things
approved permitted has improved but that
hasn't changed, right, the input which
is how many rigs are running, how many
horizontal rigs, you know, how many frac
spreads are out there.
>> One of the big themes, you know, of the
last several years, kind of since we've
been doing the podcast but really since
COVID has been one thing after another
that encourages basically every country
in the world to think about sovereignty,
resource security and so forth. And so
obviously COVID major impetus to like
make sure you have stuff. Then the trade
war, then Ukraine, now that war in Iran,
etc. Like big structurally when you
think about I guess the last six years
now are we going to be living with the
ramifications of this six-year period
for years in terms of global commodity
markets?
>> So if you went back to the first world,
second world, you had the West and you
had the Soviet Union and you had sort of
two complete supply chains of all the
commodities, right? There were Soviet
smelters and there were western smelters
and there was just a lot of redundant
capacity.
>> Yeah.
>> Then you sort of got into the '90s and
you have the collapse of the Soviet
Union and you had at the same time that
China rose, you were lucky enough. So
the China super cycle, the China demand
super cycle came at a point in time
where you had all of this excess
capacity under managed, right? So all
you needed was a bit of capitalism
applied to Soviet assets
and that was sort of the only reason
China could feed on
consuming half of the world's copper and
half of the world's steel and half of
the world's etc.
Now we're almost flipping that and we're
saying, "Well, you know what?
China has a bunch of rare earth
processing, but now Japan and Malaysia
will have it. Now the US is going to
have it." And people you know tariffs on
copper. Well, the US needs to be
self-sufficient in copper. So we're
entering sort of the long cycle of
globalization where are we going to
recapitalize
the this the end of globalization?
>> Yeah.
>> We're going to go out and build two
smelters in or five or however we're
going to divide the planet.
>> Right.
>> It's very capital intensive. It's
inefficient. It would be powerful for
it's inflationary.
>> Yeah.
>> And then someday we're in the next cycle
we release it all. Right, so Yeah, and
so that's again a geopolitician's view
like is globalization over? If if
[snorts] a geopolitician convinces you
of that, then there's going to be a lot
of assets invested in the physical
economy.
>> All right, I have one tiny question.
Tracy's going to love it. Do you watch
Landman?
>> I have watched I tend to binge watch
when I get a chance. So I binge watched
the first season. I have not binge
watched the second.
>> Does it feel realistic to you? Is that a
real
>> My lived experience uh
has you know very little
to yeah versus Landman.
>> I would just like to say a significant
portion of my life right now is
listening to Jared talk about Landman.
>> with the show. I love Landman so much.
Anyway.
Bob Brackett, yeah.
>> Landman is
>> the the Moby Dick of our times.
>> [laughter]
>> Bob Brackett, thank you so much for
coming back on Odd Lots. Always a true a
true pleasure.
>> Thank you so much, [music] Joe. Thanks,
Tracy.
>> Thanks so much, Bob. That was great as
always.
>> Yeah.
>> [music]
>> God, I love talking to Bob so much. One
thing um with a lot of energy episodes
is that and I've mentioned it, we both
mentioned it, energy math is not
intuitive to me, you know, like I have a
very hard time conceptualizing like what
is a billion cubic feet or whatever. But
it in net gas, especially with all the
conversions that happen between the
liquefaction uh it's like I find it
really
>> It's really hard. No, I sympathize. I
was one of those like toddlers that was
trying to stick like triangle pieces
into round holes. I've always struggled
to sort of visualize shapes and sizes,
so absolutely.
>> We're we're in cells and we're not sure
what a tape is.
>> that's exactly it. But there's a bunch
of stuff that stood out from that
episode. One thing I should just clarify
cuz I don't mean to make light of you
know, I I asked about the Trump
administration being energy-friendly to
domestic US energy producers and Bob was
like, well, the war is very friendly and
I kind of waved it off like it is a huge
giveaway to US energy and you know,
Isabella Weber, another great Odd Lots
guest, had a paper about like where the
value of these higher oil prices
actually flows to and it's all the US
energy companies.
>> Trump said that himself. Yeah, you know,
he said that in one of his Truth Social
posts, something like that. He's like,
we're actually going to make more money,
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> oil producers. Most people are oil
consumers.
>> Right.
>> And so people are not happy that gas
prices. But he like sort of spun it.
He's like, oh, look, we're going to make
a lot of money because we're a net oil
exporter and energy exporter now between
LNG and crude. So, yes, clearly domestic
energy has benefited, obviously
benefiting, you know, quite a wave that
it's riding because obviously the demand
for LNG after the invasion of Ukraine.
That just that's a very big story.
>> Yeah, and I also I this brings us back
to the episode we recorded on the impact
of the Strait of Hormuz closure on
China's economy.
And this idea that well, the more
disruptions to commodity supply you have
like this, the more you have governments
sort of worried about choke points
materializing. The more you're going to
see a hastened shift to renewables that
might be
more immune from these types of
disruptions.
>> I hadn't appreciated at all until Bob
said it at the very end that you know,
like when we think of the early 2000s,
you know, the the commodity supercycle
driven by China. But that for the first
several years of China Chinese opening
up, they really benefited from the fact
that there was just a glut of capacity
that the combining of global which I
hadn't really thought about at all that
is like from an economic perspective,
there was a lot of capacity to supply
China with raw commodities, particularly
in the mid-90s, simply due to the fact
that
you know, as he said, apply a little bit
of capitalism to those Soviet assets and
suddenly you have a lot of production
brought online. The '90s were a special
time. Everything was just working out.
>> Peak humanity.
>> Peak humanity. I really believe so.
>> All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy [music] Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman - Joe
Bennett at Dashbot and Caleb Brooks at
Caleb Brooks. [music] And for more Odd
Lots content, go to bloomberg.com/odd
lots for a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
[music]
>> And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
[music] it when we get Bob Brackett on
to answer random commodity questions,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform.
>> [music]
>> And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely [music] ad-free. All
you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]